1.1 TRANSACTIONS
-----

Concurrency control is the activity of coordinating the actions of processes that operate in parallel, 
access shared data, and therefore potentially interfere with each other. Recovery is the activity of ensuring
that software and hardware failures do not corrupt persistent data. Concurrency control and recovery problem
arise in the design of hardware, operating systems, real time systems, communications systems, and database 
systems, among others. In this book, We will explore concurrency control and recovery problems in database systems.

We will study these problems using a model of database systems. This model is abstraction of many types of data
handling systems, such as database management systems of data processing applications, transaction processing system
for airline reservations or banking, and file systems for a general purpose computing environment. Our study of
concurrency control and recovery applies to any such systems that conforms to our model.

The main component of this model is *transaction*. Infomally, a transaction is an execution of a program that accesses
a shared database. The goal of concurrency control and recovery is to ensure that transactions execute atomically
meaning that

1. each transaction accesses shared data without interfering with other transactions, and 
2. if a transaction terminates normally, then all of its effects are made permanent; otherwise it has no effect at all.

The purpose of this chapter is to make this model precise.

In this section we present a user-oriented model of the system, Which consists of a database that a user can access
by executing transactions. In Section 1.2, we explain what is means for a transaction to execute atomically in the presence
failures. In Section 1.3, We explain what it means for a transaction to execute atomically in an environment where its
database access can be interleaved with those of other transactions. Section 1.4 presents a model of database system's
concurrency control and recovery components, whose goal is to realize transaction atomicity.

#### Database System

A database consists of a set of named data items. Each data item has a value. The values of data items at any one time
comprise the *state* of the database.

In practice, a data item could be a word of main memory, a page of disk, a record of a file, or a field of a record. The
size of data item contained in a data item is call granualarity of the data item. Granualarity will usually be unimportant
to our study and we will therefore leave it unspecified. When we leave granualarity unspecified, we denote data items by
lower case letters, typically x, y, and z.

A database system (DBS) is collection of hardware and software modules that support commands to access the database, called
database operations (or simply operations). The most important operations we will consider are Read and Write. Read(x)
return the value of data item x. Write(x, val) changes the value of x to val. We will use other operations from time to time.

The DBS executes each operation atomically. This means that the DBS behaves as if it executes operations sequentially, that
is, one at a time. To obtain this behavior, ths DBS might actually execute operations sequentially. However, more typically
it will execute operations concurrently. That is, There may be time when it is executing more than one operations at once.
However, even if it executes operations concurrently, the final effect must be the same as some sequential execution.

For example, suppose data items x and y are stored on two different device. The DBS might execute operations on x and y in
this order:

1. execute Read(x);
2. after step(1) is finished, concurrently execute Write(x, 1) and Read(y);
3. after step(2) is finished, execute Write(y, 0).

Although Write(x, 1) and Read(y) were executed concurrently, they maybe regarded as having executed atomically. This is 
because the execution just given has the same effect as a sequential execution, such as Read(x), Write(x, 1), Read(y), Write(y, 0) .

The DBS also supports transaction operations: Start, Commit, Abort. A program tells the DBS that it is about to begin
executing a new transaction by issuing the operation Start. It indicates the termination of the transaction by issuing
either the operation Commit or the opreation Abort. By issuing a Commit, the program tells the DBS that the transaction
has terminated normally and all of its effects should be made permanent. By issuing an Abort, the program tells the DBS
the transaction has terminated abnormally and all of its effects should be obliterated.

A program must issue each of its database operations on behalf of a particular transaction. We can model this by assuming
that the DBS response to a Start by returning a unique transaction identifier. then Program then attach this identifier
to each of its database operations, and to the Commit or Abort that it issues to terminate the transaction. Thus, from the
DBS's view-point, a transaction is defined by a Start operation, followed by a (possibly concurrent), execution a set of
database operations, followed by Commit or Abort.

A transaction maybe be a concurrent execution of two or more programs. That is, the transaction may submit two operations
to the DBS before ths DBS has responded to either one. However, the transaction's last operation must be a Commit or Abort.
Thus, the DBS must refuse to process a transaction's database operation if it arrives after the DBS has already executed
the transaction's Commit or Abort.

#### Transaction Syntax

Users interact with a DBS by invoking programs. From the User's viewpoint, a transaction is the execution of one or more
programs that include database and transaction operations.

For example, consider a banking database that contains a file of customer accounts, called Accounts, each entry of which
contains the balance in one account. A Useful transaction for this database is one that transfers money from one account
 to another.
 
 ```c++
 Procedure Transfer Begin
     Start;
     input(from_account, to_account, amount);
     // This procedure transfers "amount" from "from_account" to "to_account"
     temp := Read(Accounts[from_account];
     if temp < amount then begin
         output("insufficient funds");
         Abort;
     else begin
         Write(Accounts(from_account), temp - amount);
         temp := Read(Accounts[to_account]);
         Write(Accounts(to_account), temp + amount);
         Commit;
         output("transfer completed");
     end
     
     return
 end
 ```

The choice of language for expressing transactions is not important to our study of concurrency control and recovery.
In practice, the languge could be a database query language, a report writing language, or a high level programming
language augmented with database operations. No matter how the transaction is expressed, it must eventually be translated
into programs that issue database operations, since database operations are the only way to access the database. We
therefore assume that the programs that comprise transactions are written in a high level language with embeded database
operations.

Transfer is an unrealistic program in that it doesn't perform any error checking, such as testing for incorrect input.
Although such error checking is essential if application programs are to be reliable, it is unimportant to our 
understanding of concurrency control and recovery problems. Therefore, to keep our example programs short, we will ignore 
error checking in those programs.
 
 #### Commit and Abort
 
After the DBS executes a transaction's Commit(or Abort) operation, the transaction is said to be committed(or aborted). 
A transaction that has issued its Start operation but is not yet committed or aborted is called active. A transaction 
is uncommited if it is aborted or active.

A transaction issues an Abort operation if it cannot be completed correctly. The transaction itself may issue the Abort 
because it has detected an error from which it cannot recover, such as the "insufficent funds" condition in Transfer. 
Or the Abort may be "imposed" on a transaction by circumstances beyond its control.

For example, suppose a system failure interrupts the execution of a Transfer transaction after it debited one account 
but before it credited the other. Assuming Transfer's internal state was lost as a consequence of the failure, it cannot 
continue its execution. Therefore when the system recovers, the DBS should cause the this execution of Transfer to abort. 
In such cases, we still view the Abort to be an operation of transaction, even though the DBS actually invoked the 
operation.

Even in the absence of system failures, the DBS may decide unilaterally to abort a transaction. For example, the DBS may 
discover that it has return an incorrect value to transaction T in response to T's Read. It may discover this error long 
after it actually processed the Read. (We'll see some examples of how this may happen in the next section.) Once it 
discovers the error, it's too late to change the incorrect value, so it must abort T.

When a transaction aborts, the DBS wipes out all of its effects. The prospect that a transaction may be aborted calls for 
the ability to determine a point in time after which the DBS guarantees to the user that the transaction will not be 
aborted and its effects will be permanent. For example, in processing a deposit through an automatic teller machine, a 
customer does not want leave the machine before being assured that the deposit transaction will not be aborted. Similarly, 
from the bank's viewpoint, in processing a withdrawal the teller machine should not dispense any money before making certain 
that withdrawal transaction will not be aborted.

The Commit operation accomplishes this guarantee. Its invocation signifies that a transaction terminated normally and that 
its effects should be permanent. Executing a transaction's Commit consitiutes a guarantee by the DBS that it will not abort 
the transaction and the transaction's effects will survive subsequent failures of the system.

Since the DBS is at liberty to abort a transaction T until T commits, the user can't be sure that T's output will be 
permanent as long as T is active. Thus, a user should not trust T's output until the DBS tells the user that T has commited. 
This makes Commit an important operation for read-only transaction (called queries) as well as for transactions that write 
into database (called update transactions or updates).

The DBS should guarantee the performance of Commit under the weakest possible assumptions about correct operation of hardware 
system software, and application software. That is, it should ensure that data written by committed transaction is not lost 
as a consequence of a computer or operating system failure that corrupts main memory but leaves disk storage unaffected.


#### Messages

We assume that each transaction is self-contained, meaning that it performs its computation without any direct communication 
with other transactions. Transactions do communicate indirectly, of course, by storing and retrieving data in the database. 
However, this is the only way they can affect each other's execution.

To ensure transaction atomicity, the DBS must control all the ways that transactions interact. This means that the DBS must 
mediate each transaction's operations that can affect other transactions. In our model, the only such operations are accesses 
to shared data. Since a transaction accesses shared data by issuing database operations to the DBS, the DBS can control all 
such actions, as required.

In many systems, transactions are allowed to communicate by sending messages. We allow such message communication in our model 
provided that those messages are stored in the database. A transaction sends or receives a message by writing or reading the 
data item that holds the message.

This restriction on message communication only applies messages between transaction. Two or more processes that are executed 
on behalf of the same transaction can freely exchange messages, and those messages need not to be stored in database.


  
