1.2 RECOVERABILITY
---------

The recovery system should make the DBS behave as if the database contains all of the effects of committed transactions and 
none of the effects of uncommitted ones. If transactions never abort, recovery is rather easy. Since all transactions 
eventually commit, the DBS simply executes database operations as they arrives. So to understand recovery, one must first 
look at the processing of Aborts.

When a transaction aborts, the DBS must wipe out its effects. The effects of a transaction T are of two kinds: effects on 
data, that is, values that T wrote in the database; and effects on other transactions, namely, transactions that read values 
written by T. Both should be obliterated.

The DBS should remove T's effects by restoring, for each data item x updated by T, the value x would have had if T had never 
taken place. We say that the DBS undoes T's Write operations.

The DBS should remove T's effects by aborting the affected transactions. Aborting these transactions may trigger further 
abortions, a phenomenon called *cascading abort*.

For example, suppose the initial value of x and y are 1, and suppose transaction T1 and T2 issue opreations that the DBS 
executes in the following order:

> Write1(x, 2)
> Read2(x)
> Write2(y, 3).

The subscript on each Read and Write denote the transaction that issues it. Now suppose T1 aborts. Then the DBS undoes 
Write1(x, 2), restoring x to the value 1. Since T2 read the value x written by T1, T2 must be aborted too, a cascading abort. 
So, the DBS undoes Write2(y, 3), restoring y to 1.

Recall that by committing a transaction, the DBS guarantee that it will not subsequently abort this transaction. Given the 
possibility of cascading aborts, the DBS must be careful when it makes that guarantee. Even if a transaction T issues its 
Commit, the DBS may still need to abort T, because T may yet be invovled in a cascading abort. This will happen if T read a 
data item from some transaction that subsequently aborts. Therefore, T cannot commit until all transactions that wrote values 
read by T are guarantee not to abort, that is, are themselves committed. Execution that satisfy this condition are called 
recoverable.

This is an important concept so let's be more precise. We say transaction Ti read x from Transaction Tj in an execution, if 

1. Tj read x after Ti has written to it;
2. Ti does not abort before Tj read x; and
3. every transaction (if any) that writes x between the time Ti write it and Tj read it, aborts before Tj read it.

A transaction Tj read from Ti if Tj reads some data item from Ti. An execution is recoverable if, for every transaction T that 
commits, T's Commit follows the Commit of ervery transaction from which T read.

Recoverability is required to ensure that abortint a transactions does not change the semantic of committed transactions'
operations. To see this, let's slightly modify our example of cascading aborts:

> Write1(x, 2)
> Read2(x)
> Write2(y, 3)
> Commit2.

This is not a recoverable execution, because T2 read x from T1 and yet the Commit of T2 does not follow the Commit of T1 ( 
which is still active). The problem is what to do if T1 now aborts. We can leave T2 alone, which would violate the semantics 
of T2's Read2(x) operation; Read2(x) actually return the value 2, but given that T1 has aborted, it should have returned the value that x had before Write1(x, 2) executed. Alternatively, we can abort T2, which would violate the semantics of T2's 
Commit. Either way we are doomed. However, if the DBS had delayed Commit2, thus making the execution recoverable, there would 
be no problem with aborting T2. The system, not having processed T2's Commit, nerver promised that it would not abort T2. In 
general, delaying the processing of certain Commit is one way the DBS can ensure that executions are recoverable.

### terminal I/O

Intuitively, an execution is recoverable if the DBS always able to reserve the effects of aborted transaction on other
transactions. The definition of recoverable relies on the assumption that all such effects are through Reads and Writes. 
Without this assumption, the definition of recoverable does not correspond to its intuition.

There is on type of interaction between transactions that calls the definition into question, namely, interactions through 
users. A transaction can interact with a terminal or other user-to-computer I/O device using input and output statements. 
Since a user can read the output of one transaction and, using that information, select information to feed as input to 
another transaction, input and output statements are another method by which transactions can indirectly communicate.

For example, suppose a transaction T1 writes output to a terminal before it commits. Suppose a user read that information on 
the terminal screen, and base on it decides to enter some input to another transaction T2. Now suppose T1 abborts. Indirectly 
T2 is executing operations base on the output of T1. Since T1 has aborted, T2 should abort too, a cascading abort. 
Unfortunately, the DBS doesn't know about this dependency between T1 and T2, and Therefore isn't in a position to ensure 
automatically that the cascading abort takes place.

In a sense, the error here is really the user's. Until the DBS write the message "Transaction T1 has committed" on the user's 
terminal, the user should not trust the output produced by T1. Until that message appears, the user doesn't know whether T1 
will commit; it may abort and thereby invalidate its terminal output. In the previous paragraph, the user incorrectly assumed 
T1's terminal output would be committed, and therefore prematurely propagated T1's effects to another transaction.

The DBS can prevent users from prematurely propagating the effects of an uncommitted transaction T by deferring T's output 
statements until after T commits. Then the user will only see committed output.

It is often acceptable for the DBS to adopt the deferred output approach. In particular, it works well if each transaction 
request all of its input from the user before it produces any output. But if transaction T writes a message to a terminal 
and subsequently requests input from the user, deferring outputs put the user in an untenable position. The user's response 
to T's input request may depend on the uncommitted output that he or she has not yet seen. In this case, the DBS must release 
the output to the terminal before T commits.

Suppose the DBS does release T's output and the user then responds to T's input request. Now suppose T aborts. Depending on 
the reason why T aborted, the user may choose to try executing T again. Since other transactions may have executed between 
the time T aborted and was restarted, T's second execution may be reading a different database state than its first execution. 
It may therefore produce different output, which may suggest to the user that different input is required than in T's first 
execution. Therefore, in reexecuting T, the DBS cannot reuse the terminal input from T's first execution.

### Avoid Cascading Aborts

Enforcing recoverability does not remove the possibility of cascading aborts. On the contrary, cascading aborts may have to 
take place precisely to guarantee that an execution is recoverable. Let's turn to our example again:

> Write1(x, 2); Read2(x); Write2(y, 3); Abort1.

This is a recoverable execution. T2 must abort because if it ever committed, the execution would no longer be recoverable.

However, the prospect of cascading aborts is unpleasant. First, they require significant bookkeeping to keep track of which transactions 
have read from which others. Second, more importantly, they entail the possibilty of uncontrollably many transactions being forced to 
abort because some other transaction happened to abort. This is very undesirable. In practice, DBSs are designed to avoid cascading 
aborts.

We say that a DBS avoid cascading aborts (or is cascadeless) if it ensures that every transaction reads only those values that were 
written by committed transactions. Thus only committed transactions can affect other transactions.

To acheive cascadelessness, the DBS must delay each Read(x) until all transactions that have previously issued Write(x, val) have either 
aborted or committed. In doing so, recoverability is also achieved: a transaction must execute its Commit after having executed all its 
Reads and therefore after all the Commits of transactions from which it read.
