INTRODUCTION
-------------

In this chapter we will examine two scheduling techniques that do not use locks, timestamp ordering(TO) and serialization
graph testing(SGT). As with 2PL, we'll see aggressive and conservative as well as centralized and distributed versions of 
both techniques.

We will also at a very aggresive variety of schedulers, called certifiers. A certifier never delays operations submitted by 
TMs. It always output them right away. When a transaction is ready to commit, the certifier runs a "certification test" to 
determine whether the transaction was involved in a non-SR execution. If the transaction fails this test, then the certifier 
aborts the transaction. Otherwise, it allows the transaction to commit. We will describe certifiers based on all three 
techniques: 2PL, TO, SGT.

In the final section, We will show how to combine scheduling techniques into composite schedulers. For example, a composite 
schedulers. For example, a composite scheduler could use 2PL for part of its synchronization activity and TO for another part 
. Using the composite rules, you can use the basic techniques we have discussed to construct hundreds of different types of 
schedulers, all of which produce SR executions.

Unlike 2PL, the techniques described in this chapter are not currently used in many commerical products. Moreover, their 
performance relative to 2PL is not well understood. Therefore, the material in this chapter is presented mostly at a 
conceptual level, with fewer performance comparisons and practical details than in Chapter 3.
