4.2 TIMESTAMP ORDERING (TO)
-----------------

### Introduction

In timestamp ordering, the TM assigns a unique timestamp, ts(Ti), to each transaction Ti. It generates timestamps using any 
of the techniques of described in Section 3.11, in the context of timestamp-based deadlock prevention. the TM attaches a 
transaction's timestamp to each operation issued by the transaction. It will therefore be convenient to speak of the timestamp 
of operation oi(x), which is simply the timestamp of the transaction that issued the operations. A TO scheduler orders 
conflicting operations according to their timestamps. More precisely, it enforces the rule, called the TO rule.

> TO rule: if pi[x] and qj[x] are conflicting operations, then the DM processes pi[x] before qj[x] iff ts(Ti) < ts(Tj).

The next theorem shows that the TO rule produce ST executions.

> Theorem 4.1: if H is a history representing an execution produced by a TO scheduler, then H is SR.

> Proof: Consider SG(T). If Ti -> Tj is an edge of SG(H), then there must exist conflicting operations pi[x], qj[x] in H such 
> that pi[x] < qj[x]. Hence by TO rule, ts(Ti) < ts(Tj). If a cycle Tj -> T2 -> ... -> Tn -> Ti existed in SG (H), then by 
induction ts(Tj) < ts(Tj), a contradiction. So SG(H) is a acyclic, and by the Serializability Theorem, H is SR.

By enforcing the TO rule, we are ensuring that every pair of conflicting operations is executed in timestamp order. Thus, a TO 
execution has the same effect as a serial execution in which the transactions appear in the timestamp order. In the rest of 
this section we will present ways of enforcing the TO rule.

### Basic TO

Basic TO is a simple and aggressive implementation of the TO rule. It accepts operations from the TM and immedidately outputs 
them to the DM in first-come-first-served order. To ensure that this order does not violate the TO rule, the scheduler rejects 
operations that it receives too late. An operation pi[x] is too late if it arrives after the scheduler has already output some 
conflicting operations qj[x] with ts(Tj) > ts(Ti) is too late, then it cannot be scheduled without violating the TO rule. 
Since the scheduler has already output qj[x], it can only solve the problem by rejecting pi[x].

if pi[x] is rejected, then Ti must abort. When Ti is resubmitted, it must be assigned a larger timestamp - large enough that 
its operation are less likely to be rejected during its second execution. Notice the difference with timestamp-based deadlock 
prevention, where an aborted transaction is resubmitted with the same tiemstamp to avoid cyclic restart. Here it is 
resubmitted with a new and larger timestamp to avoid certain rejection.

To determin if an operation has arrived to late, the Basic TO scheduler maintains for every data item x 
 
